UNIT 1: Set Theory and Basics of Counting 

Topics 

Notations of set theory 
Relations and operations on sets 
Venn Diagrams  
Set identities 
Cardinality of sets and Principle of inclusion and exclusion (Laws of addition) 
 
Learning Objectives 
By the end of this Unit, you will be able to: 
Identify set notations, types of sets, relations, and cardinality of sets. 
Apply the basic operations of set theory and relations. 
Create and interpret Venn Diagrams for real-world counting problems. 
Apply set identities and principles of inclusion and exclusion (PIE) to solve problems. 
 
Tasks 
Read through the Learning Guide and the Reading Assignment 
Complete the Discussion Assignment by posting in the Discussion Forum 
Respond to three of your fellow classmates’ posts in the Discussion Forum 
Complete and submit the Learning Journal 
Take and submit the Self-Quiz 

Introduction 
The concept of sets is so fundamental that it unifies mathematics and its cognates. 
The foundation of set theory was laid by the German Mathematician Georg Cantor in the later part of the 19th century. 
Today, Cantor’s theory has penetrated almost all branches of Mathematics such as 
Real analysis, Measure Theory, Number Theory, Information Theory, and Artificial Intelligence. 
The concepts of sets revolutionize our mathematical thinking and enable us to express ourselves concisely and clearly.   
In this unit, you will be introduced to basic mathematical sets, notations, operations, identities, and 
their applications. You will also learn the applications of set theory to counting. 

Reading Assignment 
As you read through the learning resource consider the following: 
How helpful are the notations and special sets while writing the expressions mathematically? 
How do you interpret the relations on sets, operations on sets, and counting using Venn diagrams? 

Read: 

1. Doerr, A., & Levasseur, K. (2022). Applied discrete structures (3rd ed.). licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 
In Chapter 4, More on Sets, you need to learn section 4.2, Laws of Set Theory (p. 80). Ensure that you go through all the topics including the proofs and solving the questions in the exercises. 
Please note: You can refer to Appendix D towards the end of the textbook for hints and solutions to most of the exercise questions. 
 
2. Levin, O. (2021). Discrete mathematics: An open introduction (3rd ed.). licensed under CC 4.0 
In Chapter 0, Introduction and Preliminaries, you need to learn section 0.3, Sets (p.24) which covers the topics of Notation, Relationships Between Sets, Operations on Sets, and Venn Diagrams. Ensure that you go through these topics including the examples and solving the questions in the exercises. 
In Chapter 1, Counting, you need to learn section 1.1, Additive and Multiplicative Principles (p.57) which covers the topics Counting with Sets, and Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion. Ensure that you go through these topics including the examples and solving the questions in the exercises. 
Please note: You can refer to Appendix A and B towards the end of the textbook for hints and solutions to most of the exercise questions. 

 